Life on a logistic planet

The Apache helicopter is a beautiful machine. A sloped brow thickens vertically into an oblong thorax, flanked by narrow horizontal fins that carry a destructive ability orders above human scale. The thorax tapers to a lithe tail long again as its body capped by a triangular fin. In flight, viewed from behind, its rotors are nearly invisible, existing mostly as a mental footnote to explain the technical wonder in progress. Look at a hawk for a moment and its flight is immediately legible as such. The Apache's insectine body moves through the air in an entirely different way, pitching and yawing about its center impossibly fast, as if unbound by the same laws that lift the hawk and carry it smoothly across an updraft. Apart from a few upgrades to weapons and guidance systems, its form has been more or less unchanged since 1975. Like the crocodile, whose genetic heritage has scarcely changed since before the meteor strike that wiped out the dinosaurs, it is a perfect predator. 

From a young age, I learned to view a piece of technology as a snapshot of an infinite trajectory under constant acceleration. Nearly every associated specification should move in the direction of convenience at an exponential rate. Moore's Law predicts that the density of transistors on a computer chip will double every two years. For my entire conscious existence, from the age of seven or so, that expectation was more or less borne out. 

Of course, Moore's Law can't actually be true forever. Things can only get so small, and electrical circuits become a lot harder to manage when you have to think about interference from quantum physics. Computers are almost at that point now. A few years ago the trend in graphics processors was towards miniaturization: the real value proposition for most people wasn't the biggest newest one but the midrange card that could eke out comparable performance to last year's flagship at half size and half the thermal design power (TDP). The last few generations have moved away from this trend. Size and TDP for even midrange cards have increased dramatically. NVIDIA's RTX 5080 is expected to draw more power and cost more than my entire PC with a comparable-level card from just four years ago. 

Earth, being a finite place, rarely hosts systems that grow exponentially. On a long enough timescale, almost everything here that looks exponential turns out to be logistic. A logistic curve starts at zero, and at some point begins to grow with an acceleration that suggests exponential growth. Then, suddenly, its growth rate slows precipitously and the curve flattens under a horizontal asymptote - a glass ceiling, if you will. The simplest curve resembles an S-shape turned about 30 degrees clockwise, and it describes the dynamics of almost every living population we've observed long enough in a habitat with a finite carrying capacity. If you zoom in on just the right window of time, you would be forgiven for mistaking a logistic curve for an exponential one. But if you're patient and sober-minded (and your annual bonus doesn't depend on pumping out optimistic forecasts), even Moore's Law will hew closer to logistic. 

A surprising amount of modern technology is built on first-order approximations - essentially, taking the current rate of change associated with a phenomenon and projecting it as a straight line into the future. It's worked out pretty well for us so far, but nature's nonlinearity sometimes creates soft constraints that throw our naive predictions for a loop. The "square-cube law" is one example. As the height or length of a living creature increases linearly, its surface area increases quadratically and its volume (and thus its mass) tend to increase cubically. It turns out that the evolutionary fitness of a vertebrate's skeletal structure has a local maximum  from the size of a hamster to a VW Golf. On land, with current oxygen levels and Earth's particular gravity, fitness tapers off dramatically as animals grow much beyond hatchback size. Meat just gets too heavy for bones to support its weight. In the ocean, where gravity is less pronounced, a different set of constraints apply, resulting in deep-sea gigantism and allowing creatures like the giant squid and blue whale to flourish.   

In the '10s, relying on the first-order approximations of tech optimists was a recipe for disappointment. Peter Thiel famously lamented that we "were promised flying cars, but we got 140 characters." Thiel and others like him turn this truth into a blame game, pointing the finger at their political heels like new hiring practices and "green" public investment standards. But perhaps there's another square-cube law here that creates a chilling effect on further technical progress in our current cloud-based, **-as-a-service, centralized client-server model of tech development. We may have been wrong to look at the rate of tech development in the 1990s and expect flying cars at all. In the field of machine learning, the new scaling laws require an ever-increasing amount of computational resources to drive further performance improvements. We're so past the point of diminishing returns that tech companies are starting to build datacenters with on-site nuclear power plants to meet some of their astronomical power demand. Perhaps, not unlike the Apache, information processing is close to maturity. It would certainly appear so from the increasingly speculative venture-funded, hype-based tech ideas that dominated the tech atmosphere in the last four years. Advances in computer hardware and telecommunications from the 1950s to the 1990s created a fertile "business habitat", and IT may be reaching the upper asymptote of its logistic growth. 

We understand perfectly well that other living systems are constrained in their growth. But we have a bit of a blind spot when it comes to ourselves and the machines we build. It's partially because we've never been near global carrying capacity, and so never confronted our own asymptote. But look at the trends in crop productivity and you'll understand that our current food system only has so much room to grow - it too is constrained by finite space and competition with the ever-growing human population. There's little convincing evidence for the scalability of new agricultural technologies like hydroponics and vertical farming, so there's no reason to believe the magical thinking that some innovation will come and save us at the last minute. Of course, exponential returns can still happen on a logistic planet in the short-term. But just like one bacterial population overtaking another in a petri dish, the returns are zero-sum. The whole biomass on the dish is constrained.

Taken together, logistic growth explains much of the incoherence that defines this moment. Our cultural institutions (or social-technological??) - the superstructure, the cathedral, the symbolic economy, finance, media, education, science, consumer tech, whatever - have all tied themselves into the same network of legitimacy. A successful existence in the world they circumscribe, as viewed through the apps you must use to maintain it (sentence about the myriad apps that run your symbolic life) - individual retirement, for instance - is essentially predicated on perpetual growth. As the impossibility of such growth becomes increasingly clear, the symbolic economy as a whole suffers a massive blow. 

The fantasy that we can keep it together is attractive to those institutions because they rely on the continuation of this economic model, where the state administers administers/administrates the market on behalf of financial and technological capital. Note that these institutions are owned by a small number of private firms and individuals, and that the liberal economic model is attractive to them because the "norms" mean that the state acts on their behalf and they hold the leash of discursive/cultural control. But it's becoming increasingly clear that a different model, one where firms act on behalf of the state and marked by more explicit state control, aggressive planning and a public-private oligarchy, is winning out, even according to the arbitrary metrics our cathedral defines. China is ten years ahead of the American electric vehicle industry, and all signs point to the US government ramping up protectionism. Ironic - the inventors of globalism are gearing up for a total reversal once it no longer benefits our firms. At the very least, it'll be interesting to see how our superstructure responds to these new competitive pressures. One can only hope that they will meet the moment and understand that another epoch of growth will require more public investment into boring hard tech and infrastructure instead of buying into their own hype. 

In a way, contrary to what think-piece authors love to crow, Francis Fukuyama was right. The 1990s really were the end of a particular history - one where a confluence of small factors led to a uniquely fertile habitat for economic growth. Once we let go if that history, we can finally get around to building the future.  


--------------------------------------------


We're perfectly willing to admit that other living systems are constrained in their growth. But we have a bit of a blind spot when it comes to ourselves and the machines we build. It's partially because we've never been near the carrying capacity. But look at the trends in crop productivity and you'll understand that our current food system only has so much room to grow - it too is constrained by finite space and competing with the ever-growing population. There's little convincing evidence for the scalability of new agricultural technologies like hydroponics and vertical farming, so there's no reason to believe the magical thinking that some innovation will come and save us at the last minute. Of course, exponential returns can still happen on a logistic planet in the short-term. But just like one bacterial population overtaking another in a petri dish, the returns are zero-sum. The whole biomass on the dish is constrained. 

I'm not going to waste anyone's time with an annoying moralizing argument about perpetual non-zero-sum growth. There isn't a single state in the US where the average household has a debt-to-income ratio below 1. A full three-quarters of this debt, totalling $17.2T last year, is comprised of mortgage debt. Making a bet with that much leverage only really makes sense if you're sure the price of your home will go up. This will only happen in perpetual non-zero-sum growth. Regardless of what corporate balance sheets or indicators say, the economy as seen by an American household depends on such growth.

Since 2008 it seems like some amount of distrust of this assumption is priced into our culture.  

Just notice that a significant part of the cultural MESSAGING? IDK MAYBE CHANGE seemingly implies that the way to have a good personal future tends to require a highly leveraged bet on a high-growth economic sector. The last few decades have seen the leverage increase and the sectors get weirder, even when considering only the bets made by serious institutional investors - derivatives on mortgages, cryptocurrency and its associated boondoggles, and now chatbots. Even if you believe, as I do, that the last five years of developments in AI foretell huge changes to our mode of production, the sky-high VC valuations and the increasing proliferation of totally vestigial built-in website "assistants" seem to suggest a glut of increasingly desperate attempts TODO: FIX WORDING by capital to secure another year of 12% returns.






The problem is that our economy, or at least the symbolic economy (DEFINE THIS?), requires exponential growth. The high overall debt-to-equity ratio and the prevalence of digital cash have both supercharged the rate of return on imaginary money parked in the right place

As we reach the top of this logistic curve, investors are forced to look in increasingly fantastical places for their return. My dad got me an internship at his college friend's hedge fund in 2021, and even I could sense the desperation in the faces of the sell-side investment bankers who tried to pitch cryptocurrency companies to us, even back then. The current hype around AI is slightly more factually based, because there are currently working products and applying them across a range of industries will actually create some efficiency by augmenting human decision-making. The focus on large language models (LLMs), however, is mostly hype. They have undoubtedly gotten more impressive, but they are limited in their ability to do work that actually drives economic value. You would be surprised how vestigial most email-job people are to the real economy. 


Boo hoo, less people will have jobs. I don't really think begging for a make-work job is a viable political angle. If you are surplus you are surplus, and society will need to learn how to care for surplus people.  




The blockchain boom of the early 2020s was a perfect example of 
It's funny when investors lose their shirts on a gig app for creative director work, or a startup that promises to accelerate inner-city education with blockchain technology

------- BACKMATTER/repo of stuff I might use -------------


The problem is that our entire symbolic economy relies on exponential economic growth. By symbolic economy, I mean the system of buying and selling services using electronic payments between banks, as opposed to the exchange of physical commodities for currency. Since the so-called "financialization" of the economy in the 1970s and '80s, the symbolic economy has exploded, along with the white-collar jobs of th

The money used for such transactions doesn't really exist in physical form, and it isn't even sent per transaction. The Automated Clearing House (ACH) tallies up the amounts sent between banks at the end of each day and the banks settle up the net value. This way of doing things, fractional reserve banking supercharged by digital money and a few decades of quantitative easing, means that there are untold amounts of imaginary "money" floating around looking for pockets to fall into. 


is a ponzi scheme
The term has been completely blown out by overuse by whining moralists who think it just refers to a way that idiots lose money. But in this case, the dynamics of the American economy, which, from a participant's point of view, generally centers around equity in a house, only makes sense as a scheme that relies on an exponential increase of buyers at each round. 
If I were to put $1000 into an account on an online, equities-only stock brokerage and asked pretty please, I could probably borrow an extra $1000 to make a trade. That's 2x leverage, and absent a more sophisticated quantitative strategy it would generally not be a great idea to buy a random stock at 2x leverage. And yet, in the case of housing, buyers often have access to leverage an order of magnitude higher, or even more. Federal assistance programs can bring some down payments down to as low as 2 percent. That's an insane amount of leverage on something that is financially not that different than buying General Motors stock, and with that leverage comes insane interest. Right now, you can expect to pay one and a half (or more) times the closing cost of a house over the lifetime of your mortgage. The only reason a reasonable actor would take such a risk at such a high borrowing cost is if the value of the house were certain to increase enough to cover the cost of the leverage you used to buy the house. 

Here the symbolic economy 


When a physical model encounters inputs in the middle of the domain on which it was calibrated, things behave as expected. 
Of course, in the event that the housing market crashes after you've paid off your mortgage, you might still get to live in your house, and you couldn't live in your GM stock. But you would have sunk at least a house and a half's worth of money into 


I sometimes wonder how much of the relative overvaluations of the tech sector (by earnings multiples) is due to an irrational expectation of exponential growth. Moore's Law carrys over well as a surrogate for modeling the global adoption of technology 


Apply similar reasoning to the rest of our economy and you

What do you do when all the forecasting models that steer our world still assume an exponential curve? How can you force the helmsmen to make urgent changes necessary to prevent chaos in a few decades when they assume that the value of money is subject to exponential decay?

